URL: https://apnews.com/article/comey-james-justice-department-5ec1a59d152bc1fd000ade15e20745b5?utm_source=firefox-newtab-en-us
Timestamp: 2025-11-30T16:13:22.570714
Content Type: facts
Content Length: 11561 chars
================================================================================

[AI]
Summary and Facts Check

Generating AI analysis...

Powered by Tufts CS112 Team LLM Proxy | Fact Check is a free and open-source service!
Feedback
Close
1ff9
Menu
WORLD
U.S.
POLITICS
SPORTS
ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESS
SCIENCE
FACT CHECK
ODDITIES
MORE
Show Search
POLITICS
Judge dismisses Comey, James indictments after finding that prosecutor was illegally appointed
1 of 4 |  

The orders make Lindsey Halligan the latest Trump administration prosecutor to be disqualified because of the manner in which they were appointed.

2 of 4 |  

A federal judge has dismissed the criminal cases against former FBI Director James Comey and New York Attorney General Letitia James, but the Department of Justice says it intends to appeal.

3 of 4 |  

FBI Director James Comey gestures as he speaks on cyber security at the first Boston Conference of Cyber Security at Boston College, March 8, 2017, in Boston. (AP Photo/Stephan Savoia, File)

4 of 4 |  

New York Attorney General, Letitia James, speaks after pleading not guilty outside the United States District Court on Friday, Oct. 24, 2025, in Norfolk, Va. (AP Photo/John Clark,File)

BY  ERIC TUCKER
Updated 7:44 PM EST, November 25, 2025
Leer en español 
Add AP News on Google
Share

▶ Follow live updates on President Donald Trump and his administration

WASHINGTON (AP) — A federal judge on Monday dismissed the criminal cases against former FBI Director James Comey and New York Attorney General Letitia James, concluding that the prosecutor who brought the charges at President Donald Trump’s urging was illegally appointed by the Justice Department.

The rulings from U.S. District Judge Cameron McGowan Currie halt at least for now a pair of prosecutions that had targeted two of the president’s most high-profile political opponents and amount to a sharp rebuke of the Trump administration’s legal maneuvering to install an inexperienced and loyalist prosecutor willing to file the cases.

The orders do not concern the substance of the allegations against Comey or James but instead deal with the unconventional manner in which the prosecutor, Lindsey Halligan, was named to her position as interim U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia. Defense lawyers said the Trump administration had no legal authority to make the appointment. In a pair of similar rulings, Currie agreed and said the invalid appointment required the dismissal of the cases.

“All actions flowing from Ms. Halligan’s defective appointment,” including securing and signing the indictments, “were unlawful exercises of executive power and are hereby set aside,” she wrote.

RELATED STORIES
Democratic congressman’s lawsuit claims Trump housing official abused post to target Trump critics
2 MIN READ
Dismissal of Comey, James cases won’t be the final word. Here’s what the path ahead may look like
5 MIN READ
Trump spares turkeys — but not his political opponents — at annual pardoning ceremony
3 MIN READ

Speaking to reporters Tuesday aboard Air Force One, Trump said he thought Halligan “is great” and that the rulings were a “technicality,” even though the judge cited the underlying law as the basis for her decision.

A White House spokeswoman said the rulings will “not be the final word on the matter,” and Attorney General Pam Bondi vowed at an unrelated news conference that the Justice Department would pursue an “immediate appeal.” Prosecutors may also try to refile the changes, a possibility left open by the judge’s orders.

Attorney General Pam Bondi speaks with reporters as FBI Director Kash Patel, left, and Bill Essayli, acting U.S. Attorney for the Central District of California listen during a news conference at the Department of Justice, Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2025, in Washington. (AP Photo/Mark Schiefelbein)

Indictments had been subject to multiple challenges

The challenges to Halligan’s appointment are just one facet of a multiprong assault on the indictments by Comey and James, whose multiple other efforts to dismiss the cases remain unresolved.

Both have separately asserted that the prosecutions were vindictive and emblematic of a weaponized Justice Department. Comey’s lawyers last week seized on a judge’s findings of a constellation of grand jury irregularities and missteps by Halligan and James likewise has cited “outrageous government conduct” preceding her indictment.

“I am grateful that the court ended the case against me, which was a prosecution based on malevolence and incompetence and a reflection of what the Justice Department has become under Donald Trump, which is heartbreaking,” Comey, who has pleaded not guilty to charges of making a false statement and obstructing Congress, said in a video statement.

In a separate statement, James, a Democrat who has pleaded not guilty to mortgage fraud allegations, said, “I am heartened by today’s victory and grateful for the prayers and support I have received from around the country.” She said she remained “fearless in the face of these baseless charges as I continue fighting for New Yorkers every single day.”

Halligan’s appointment

At issue in Currie’s rulings is the mechanism the Trump administration employed to appoint Halligan, a former White House aide with no prior prosecutorial experience, to lead one of the Justice Department’s most elite and important offices.

Halligan was named as a replacement for Erik Siebert, a veteran prosecutor in the office and interim U.S. attorney who resigned in September amid Trump administration pressure to file charges against both Comey and James. He stepped aside after Trump told reporters he wanted Siebert “out.”

The following night, Trump said he would be nominating Halligan to the role of interim U.S. attorney and publicly implored Bondi to take action against his political opponents, saying in a Truth Social post that, “We can’t delay any longer, it’s killing our reputation and credibility” and “JUSTICE MUST BE SERVED, NOW!!!”

Comey was indicted three days after Halligan was sworn in by Bondi, and James was charged two weeks after that.

New York Attorney General, Letitia James, speaks after pleading not guilty outside the United States District Court on Friday, Oct. 24, 2025, in Norfolk, Va. (AP Photo/John Clark,File)

Attorneys general do have the authority to name an interim U.S. attorney who can serve for 120 days. But lawyers for Comey and James argued that once that period expires, as it did in Siebert’s case, the law gives federal judges in the district the exclusive authority to appoint a prosecutor to serve until the vacancy is filled. By making successive interim U.S. appointments on its own, defense lawyers said, the Justice Department did an end-run around well-established law.

“The 120-day clock began running with Mr. Siebert’s appointment on January 21, 2025. When that clock expired on May 21, 2025, so too did the Attorney General’s appointment authority,” Currie wrote. “Consequently, I conclude that the Attorney General’s attempt to install Ms. Halligan as Interim U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia was invalid and that Ms. Halligan has been unlawfully serving in that role since September 22, 2025.”

The Justice Department had defended Halligan’s appointment but revealed last month that it also given Halligan a separate position of “Special Attorney,” presumably as a way to protect the indictments from the possibility of collapse. But Currie said such a retroactive designation could not save the cases.

“The implications of a contrary conclusion are extraordinary,” the judge wrote. “It would mean the Government could send any private citizen off the street — attorney or not — into the grand jury room to secure an indictment so long as the Attorney General gives her approval after the fact. That cannot be the law.”

Though the defendants had asked for the cases to be dismissed with prejudice, meaning the Justice Department would be barred from bringing them again, Currie instead dismissed them without prejudice — leaving open the possibility that prosecutors could try to file the charges again.

Comey was indicted just days before the five-year statute of limitations in his case expired, which could complicate any effort to refile the case. One of his lawyers, Patrick Fitzgerald, said in a statement that Currie’s decision “further indicates that because the indictment is void, the statute of limitations has run and there can be no further indictment.”

Judges have separately held that several other interim U.S. attorneys — in New Jersey, Los Angeles and Nevada — have served in their positions unlawfully but have also permitted cases brought by their offices to proceed. Lawyers for Comey and James had argued that Currie’s rulings needed to go even further because Halligan was apparently the only prosecutor who presented evidence to the grand juries.

FILE - Former FBI Director James Comey, arrives to testify under subpoena behind closed doors before the House Judiciary and Oversight Committee on Capitol Hill in Washington, Dec. 7, 2018. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File)

Longtime foes of the president

Comey has for years been one of Trump’s chief antagonists. Appointed FBI director in 2013 by President Barack Obama, Comey at the time of Trump’s 2016 election was overseeing an investigation into whether the Republican’s presidential campaign had conspired with Russia to sway the outcome of the race. Furious over that investigation, Trump fired Comey in May 2017.

James has also been a frequent target of Trump’s ire, especially since winning a staggering judgment against him and the Trump Organization in a lawsuit alleging he defrauded banks by overstating the value of his real estate holdings on financial statements. An appeals court overturned the fine, which had ballooned to more than $500 million with interest, but upheld a lower court’s finding that Trump had committed fraud.

___

Associated Press writers Michael R. Sisak in New York and Lindsay Whitehurst and Alanna Durkin Richer in Memphis, Tennessee contributed to this report.

ERIC TUCKER
Tucker covers national security in Washington for The Associated Press, with a focus on the FBI and Justice Department.
twitter
 
mailto

MOST READ
College freshman is deported flying home for Thanksgiving surprise, despite court order
Police search for shooter after 4 are killed, 3 of them children, in shooting in California
Trinidad’s leader backtracks and says US Marines are in the country working on airport radar
Trump’s pardon of ex-Honduran president Hernández injects wild card into election
Peru to declare a state of emergency as migrants leaving Chile trigger backlash

The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day.
Download the AP News Mobile Apps
FROM AP NEWS
ABOUT
CONTACT US
ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT
TERMS OF USE
PRIVACY POLICY
DO NOT SELL OR SHARE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION 
LIMIT USE AND DISCLOSURE OF SENSITIVE PERSONAL INFORMATION 
CA NOTICE OF COLLECTION 
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
AP.ORG 
CAREERS 
ADVERTISE WITH US 
AP NEWS VALUES AND PRINCIPLES 
AP’S ROLE IN ELECTIONS 
AP LEADS 
AP DEFINITIVE SOURCE BLOG 
AP IMAGES SPOTLIGHT BLOG 
AP STYLEBOOK 
AP NEWS CODE OF CONDUCT

Copyright 2025 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved.

twitter
instagram
facebook
0